---
layout: post
title: "Smee 0.5.0: Publish and be damned impressed"
date: 2024-12-20 13:10:00
categories: software
author: Pete Birkinshaw
header_image: smee.png
---
New export options for Smee, including three WAYF/Discovery formats.

A major new release for the main Smee library, 0.5.0: the publish features have been rewritten and extended with more formats
and options. When Smee was started it was very much focused on consuming SAML metadata, but the new features in
version 0.5.0 now make it possible to export metadata too.

It may eventually be practical to use Smee to produce federation metadata
as well as consume it.

## Publishing formats 

* `saml` - Smee will output the entity data as a SAML metadata file. There's no signing yet so this isn't suitable for 
  publishing to others, but may be useful for applications within an organisation.
* `index` - A simple plain text list of entityID URIs and (optionally) names, as used by some of our services, and as an
  MDQ extension
* `disco` - Smee can now publish metadata in the JSON DiscoFeed format, as used by Shibboleth WAYF/Discovery services
* `thiss` - alternatively Smee can convert metadata to the format used by Seamless Access services
* `udisco` and `udest`- we have some of our own WAYF/Discovery tools with their own format, uDisco, which is a much smaller and more
  efficient format than DiscoFeed. I'll write more about this in the future.
* `markdown` - we still have the old Markdown publishing format, for when you just want to document a list of entities in
  a nice table.

## Aggregates and individual items

Out of a misguided urge to be consistent, *all* output format can produce both aggregates and collections of individual 
files. For some this makes a lot of sense - SAML metadata can be output as singe file aggregates or as MDQ-style collections - 
for others it's *possibly* useful but keeps the API consistent.

We now have over 1100 tests for the main Smee library.